---
layout: page
title: Classification
summary: "Users learn how to annotate somatic mutations and understand the significance of functional annotations. 
It also covers using different variant annotators."
---

--- 
Following the variant calling process, where somatic mutations are identified, it is essential \
to annotate these variants with functional information 
to gain a deeper understanding of their potential impact on the genome

Starting from the VCF file generated during the Detection step or provided by the user, 
**Musta** performs accurate and confident annotation by leveraging the power of two annotation tools:

- [VEP](https://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/index.html)
- [Funcotator](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360037224432-Funcotator). 

These annotation tools provide comprehensive information about the functional consequences of each variant, 
helping researchers understand the biological implications of the detected somatic mutations.

---

## Basic Usage
The command structure for invoking the Classification module in **Musta** is as follows: 

```shell 
musta classify [options]
```

By default, **Musta** uses VEP for variant annotation, but users can also choose to use Funcotator or a combination of both.

Here is a breakdown of the available options for the `musta classify` command:

**General Options:**
- `-h`, `--help`: Show the help message and exit.

**Required Options:**
- `--workdir PATH` (`-w PATH`): Specifies the destination folder for analysis. This is where the Snakemake pipeline, logs, and analysis outputs will be located.
- `--samples-file PATH` (`-s PATH`): Points to a YAML file listing the datasets you wish to analyze. This file provides information about the samples to be processed. For further details, please refer to the [dedicate section]({{site.url}}/pages/03.config/#input-datasets).
- `--reference-file PATH` (`-r PATH`): Identifies the path to the reference FASTA file, which is essential for the analysis. For further details, please refer to the [dedicate section]({{site.url}}/pages/03.config/#reference-file).
- `--data-source PATH` (`-ds PATH`): Specifies the path to a data source folder for Variant Annotations. To download data sources for VEP and Funcotator and organize the folders correctly, please refer to the [dedicate section]({{site.url}}/pages/03.config/#rclassfication-sources) 

**Optional Options:**
- `--ref-version {hg19, hg38}` or `-rf {hg19, hg38}`: Specifies the version of the Human Genome reference to use (e.g., hg19 or hg38). By default, this option is set to hg19
- `--cache-version CACHE_VERSION` or `-cv CACHE_VERSION`: Specifies the version of the offline cache to use with VEP (e.g., 75, 91, 102, 105, 106). Specifies the version of the offline cache to use with VEP
- `--tmpdir PATH` or `-t PATH`: Specifies the path to the temporary directory. Ensure that this directory has sufficient storage capacity to hold the intermediate files generated during the analysis.

**Variant Annotator Filtering Options:**
- `--also-funcotator` or `-af`: Runs GATK Funcotator in addition to VEP.
- `--only-funcotator` or `-of`: Runs GATK Funcotator exclusively without VEP.

**Additional Options:**
- `--force`, `-f`: Forces the re-creation of all output files.
- `--dryrun`, `-d`: Describes the workflow but does not execute it. This is useful for previewing the analysis steps before running them.

